7-segment Display
======================
A 7-segment display is an 8-shaped component which packages 7 LEDs. Each
LED is called a segment â€“ when energized, one segment forms part of a
numeral (both decimal and hexadecimal) to be displayed. An additional
8th LED is sometimes used within the same package thus allowing the
indication of a decimal point (DP) when two or more 7-segment displays
are connected together to display numbers greater than ten.

.. image:: img/image202.jpeg
    :align: center

Each of the LEDs in the display is given a positional segment with one
of its connection pins led out from the rectangular plastic package.
These LED pins are labeled from "a" through to "g" representing each
individual LED. The other LED pins are connected together forming a
common pin. So by forward biasing the appropriate pins of the LED
segments in a particular order, some segments will brighten and others
stay dim, thus showing the corresponding character on the display.

The common pin of the display generally tells its type. There are two
types of pin connection: a pin of connected cathodes and one of
connected anodes, indicating Common Cathode (CC) and Common Anode (CA).
As the name suggests, a CC display has all the cathodes of the 7 LEDs
connected when a CA display has all the anodes of the 7 segments
connected.

**Common Cathode 7-Segment Display**

In a common cathode display, the cathodes of all the LED segments are
connected to the logic "0" or ground. Then an individual segment (a-imgg)
is energized by a "HIGH", or logic "1" signal via a current limiting
resistor to forward bias the anode of the segment.

.. image:: img/image203.jpeg
   :align: center
   :width: 600

**Common Anode 7-Segment Display**

In a common anode display, the anodes of all the LED segments are
connected to the logic "1". Then an individual segment (a-g) is
energized by a ground, logic "0" or "LOW" signal via a current limiting
resistor to the cathode of the segment.

.. image:: img/image204.jpeg
   :align: center
   :width: 600


**Example**

* :ref:`7segmeng_uno` (R4 Minima Board Project)
* :ref:`digital_dice_uno` (R4 Minima Board Project)

