.. _button_uno:

Lesson 3 Controlling LED by Button
=========================================

Introduction
----------------

In this experiment, we will learn how to turn on/off an LED by using an
I/O port and a button. The "I/O port" refers to the INPUT and OUTPUT
port. Here the INPUT port of the Uno board is used to read the output of
an external device. Since the board itself has an LED (connected to Pin
13), you can use this LED to do this experiment for convenience.

Components
---------------

.. image:: img/uno04.png
    :align: center


* :ref:`uno_r4`
* :ref:`Breadboard`
* :ref:`Jumper Wires`
* :ref:`Resistor`
* :ref:`Capacitor`
* :ref:`Button`

Schematic Diagram
------------------------

Connect one end of the buttons to pin 12 which connects with a pull-down
resistor and a 0.1uF (104) capacitor (to eliminate jitter and output a
stable level when the button is working). Connect the other end of the
resistor to GND and one of the pins at the other end of the button to
5V. When the button is pressed, pin 12 is 5V (HIGH) and set pin 13 (integrated with an LED) as High at
the same time. Then release the button (pin 12 changes to LOW) and pin
13 is Low. So we will see the LED lights up and goes out alternately as
the button is pressed and released.

.. image:: img/image66.png
    :align: center


Experimental Procedures
-------------------------------

**Step 1:** Build the circuit.

.. image:: img/l3_button.png
    :align: center


**Step 2:** Open the code file.

**Step 3:** Select the **Board** and **Port.**

**Step 4:** Upload the sketch to the board.

Now, press the button, and the LED on the Uno board will light up.


Code
-------

.. raw:: html

    <iframe src=https://create.arduino.cc/editor/sunfounder01/1fa2a036-a121-4f23-8819-cbacfa0717a1/preview?embed style="height:510px;width:100%;margin:10px 0" frameborder=0></iframe>

Code Analysis
-------------------

**Define variables**

.. code-block:: arduino

    const int buttonPin = 12; //the button connect to pin 12

    const int ledPin = 13; //the led connect to pin13

    int buttonState = 0; // variable for reading the pushbutton status

Connect the button to pin 12. LED has been connected to pin 13. Define a
variable *buttonState* to restore the state of the button.

**Set the input and output status of the pins**

.. code-block:: arduino

    pinMode(buttonPin, INPUT); //initialize thebuttonPin as input

    pinMode(ledPin, OUTPUT); //initialize the led pin as output

We need to know the status of the button in this experiment, so here set
the *buttonPin* as INPUT; to set HIGH/LOW of the LED, we set *LedPin* as
OUTPUT.

**Read the status of the button**

.. code-block:: arduino

    buttonState = digitalRead(buttonPin);

buttonPin(Pin12) is a digital pin; here is to read the value of the
button and store it in *buttonState*.

**digitalRead (Pin)**: Reads the value from a specified digital pin,
either HIGH or LOW.

**Press the button to make the buzzer sound**

.. code-block:: arduino

    if (buttonState == HIGH )

    {

        digitalWrite(ledPin, HIGH); //turn the led on

    }

    else

    {

        digitalWrite(ledPin, LOW); //turn the led off

    }

In this part, when the **buttonState** is High level, write *ledPin* as
High and the LED will be turned on. As one end of the button has been
connected to 5V and the other end to pin 12, when the button is pressed,
pin 12 is 5V (HIGH). And then determine with the *if*\ (conditional); if
the conditional is true, then the LED will light up.

``else`` means that when the if(conditional) is determined as false, run
the code in ``else``.

Experiment Summary
-------------------------

You can also change the code to: when the button is pressed, if
(buttonState=HIGH). The LED goes out (digitalWrite(ledPin, LOW)). When
the button is released (the else), the LED lights up
((digitalWrite(ledPin, HIGH)). You only need to replace the code in
**if** with those in **else**.